So she's like a force of nature.
And this is why the regime
is so afraid of her.
her charisma is so powerful
that even members of the armed forces,
have backed her.
That's, by the way,
one of the reasons why they had the access
to the documents
showing that they won the presidency,
because members in the military
were leaking these documents
to the opposition,
100 soldiers are in prison,
and they humiliate them
and they tortured them and so on,
because they are behind Maria Corina
and not behind
Maduro.
You think?
Hello, everybody.
My wife, Tammy, and I recently
had the privilege of touring through
Mexico and South America.
We didn't tour, obviously,
through the whole continent.
We went to a couple places in Brazil
and to Chilean
and to Mexico
and I met some very interesting people
along the way, which is always something
that happens, including the gentleman
I'm talking to today,
Axel Kaiser, Baron, born Horn Haggard.
He's a Chilean German lawyer, a master
in investments, Commerce and arbitration.
Master of Arts and Doctor of Philosophy
from the University of Heidelberg
in Germany. It's a very good university.
He is
co-founder and president of the Foundation
for Progress in Chile,
one of the most influential free market
think tanks in Latin America.
He's also a senior fellow
at the Arch Bridge Institute
in Washington, and director
of the Friedrich Hayek Chair at Adolfo
I Business University from 2016 to 2024.
So why are we talking?
Well, I thought it would be good
to bring everyone an update
on the political and ideological situation
in South America.
Now, that's an impossible thing
to do, obviously,
in the course of a 90 minute podcast,
because it's very complicated
to talk about a whole continent
and much of what we focused on,
what was, to do with the events
that are transpiring in Venezuela, where?
The age old conflict between what's
essentially a crooked, corrupt,
propagandistic,
draconian communist totalitarian state
and the people and the opposition
to that state is transpiring.
And so we walked through the situation
in Venezuela.
There was a recent election there.
The incumbent,
the aforementioned totalitarian Maduro,
apparently lost, and
is very unlikely to give up power.
why should anyone care?
Well.
The world's a small place now,
and what happens everywhere
has an effect that's local.
If South America's destabilized,
you can expect a lot more trouble.
For example, at the southern US border.
And by a lot, I mean a lot.
I mean millions of people.
And if the communist dystopian is
and they're Iranian, Chinese and Russian
propagandistic backers and troublemakers
get their way, there's going to be plenty
of dystopian South America.
And don't be thinking
you're going to escape unscathed from that
because you're not.
And so
we talked about Venezuela.
We talked about Chile,
and we talked about Argentina and Chile,
the new government there.
And so
we talked about different schools
of economics as well,
and what influence they all had in the way
that geopolitical affairs
play themselves out. So
join us for that. And.
Learn along with me about what's
transpiring with our southern neighbors
Well, Doctor Kaiser,
let's just jump right into it.
Let's talk about Venezuela.
Maybe you can give people
a bit of an update
about the current situation,
and then we could delve
into that historically,
and then we'll move into the topic
of South and Central America more broadly.
So give us your thoughts on Venezuela.
a very, you know, sad situation
we are living now.
I started my career in Venezuela,
in Caracas, back in 2005.
I was, starting the socialist revolution,
in Caracas.
And I came to the conclusion
that, Chavez had come to power
and he would never leave, which is what
usually socialist, dictators do.
And, at the time, my friends in
Venezuela had the hope that they could,
vote him out.
It never happened. As we all know.
And what we really are experiencing
is the, consequences
of decades of socialism.
you can vote socialists in,
but you cannot vote them out.
This is one of the main lessons
that you that you have in Venezuela,
especially if you have weak institutions.
And what we do have now, it's
a horrible regime.
It's a tyrannical dictatorship
that has been there for decades already.
And Maduro is, systematically
engaging in human rights violation
He stole the election.
We all know that.
a couple of weeks ago and the, French
we have there,
they are fighting on the ground,
literally risking their lives.
a good friend of mine
was recently arrested by their mother.
A regime with no,
you know, warrant or whatever.
I mean, just
the police came to her house.
They took her to, to prison,
and who knows what they are doing to her.
And just because she was posting
some content on social media
and, the problem that, Venezuela poses
for the whole region and not only,
Latin America, but also the United States,
is that the Maduro regime?
It's a big narco dictatorship.
So they are in bed with the cartel
de Los Solis.
They are running the soulless cartel,
which is the Sun Cartel.
And,
they are exporting, cocaine everywhere.
And not only that, they are in bed
with the Iranian regime and with Russia.
So they are being supported
by Russia, Iran, and also by China.
So I think this poses a security
threat to the United States
because they have, you know,
Hezbollah has training camps in Venezuela.
And any
if you have this open borders with Mexico,
I'm sure they have infiltrated people
coming from Venezuela to the United States
that are not their regular criminals
that you can see
nowadays operating in New York
or other parts in the United States.
These are also Islamic terrorists.
I'm pretty sure
that you have some of them now,
that came from Venezuela via Mexico
into the United States.
So this is a dramatic situation.
And I have a message
from the group of Maria
Guerrero, my child,
because I've been in contact with them.
She's the opposition
leader. She's a good friend of mine.
to the international
media, they are really very upset,
by the way, that the press,
in the Western world
has been covering all this.
And they have a double standard
when it comes to left wing dictatorships
as compared to not left wing or right
wing dictators, dictatorships.
And, you have several newspapers
like El Pais in Spain, for instance,
that have called Maria Claudia machado
a far right extremist,
which is complete nonsense.
She is fighting for freedom
and democracy.
and then you have other media
like the New York Times
who have been very biased as well.
And they, sent me a message
and I'm using this platform, and
they thank you, Yordan, for this interview
because, they need the support
of the international community.
If you want a transition
to happen in Venezuela, which is looking
increasingly
unlikely with the passing of time.
so it's very sad.
And this is poisoning
the whole of the region, the whole region.
And also, I think it's going to be
a big problem for the United States
if we if they don't push enough
to get rid of Maduro right now,
for the reasons I already mentioned.
All right. So there's a lot in.
In what you just said.
So let me take it apart piece by piece.
You said, for example,
that if you vote in the socialists,
you don't get to vote them out.
And so we probably want
to draw a distinction
or at least have a discussion
about socialism versus communism,
or a discussion about whether or not
that distinction is even reasonable.
It's it's definitely the case
that in some Western countries,
more left leaning regimes
are voted in and voted out
with some degree of regularity.
Canada has a socialist party,
the New Democratic Party,
and it has never won an election federally
and is unlikely ever to do so.
I would say,
because it never seems to gain about more
than about 20% of the population.
But it's certainly run many provinces
and, you know, often
not cataclysmic,
sometimes even intelligently,
depending on who it was
that was running the show, let's say so.
And then, of course,
people tend to presume that countries like
Sweden and Denmark
and Norway are socialist countries,
even though fundamentally
they adhere to free market principles.
So do you want to distinguish first
for maybe some definitions?
What do you think
the difference is between
a socialist country
and a communist country?
And how, how
or how should people draw a distinction?
distinguish between social democracy,
which is,
you know, on the left
that we have usually in the Western world,
in the developed nations, people like,
Biden or people like,
you know, Justin Trudeau,
people like that who can be very far left
when it comes to, their woke issues
and all of this value conflicts
that we have now in the West.
And I believe that they are responsible
for endorsing an ideology
that will end up destroying the West
if they are successful in the end.
But they are not this
revolutionary socialist that we have now,
in, in Latin America,
or that we used to have
in the Western world during the Cold War,
like you had them in Italy and France.
You had them in Germany.
You had terrorist groups
that were fighting
against the establishment being funded
by the Soviet Union and so on.
So I would make a distinction there.
and also, if you have countries
with more solid institutions,
even within Latin American,
they are never able to achieve their goal
of concentrating power in their own hands,
like Chile is a good example of that.
We had a constitutional referendum
a couple of years ago,
and the left proposed a
very radical constitution,
a very woke constitution,
but at the same time, communist
constitution and over 60% of Chileans
voted against that.
So we were saved by, by this decision,
in the referendum.
So they failed in their attempt
to, you know, control power.
so I would say and in the
classical, definition of socialism
and Marxism used to
or communism, they used to be more or less
the same during the Cold War.
I mean, it would be hard to argue,
that the Socialist,
was not at the same time,
someone who believed in the,
in the Soviet Union type of system,
central plant economy.
This is, point that Hayek and Mrs.
were making during the Cold War
fighting against the socialists
because the sources, socialists
were arguing for the central
plant economy,
which in the end would have destroyed
all sort of, political liberties
and democracy, as well.
So, I would distinguish more,
as I said, between the Social Democrats
and within the Social Democrats, you have
you have also, more extreme
type of people than others
and the socialists and communists.
And even if some political parties
have the name of socialists
nowadays, they are more
like social democrats than true socialists
that are inspired 100%
by the Marxist and Leninist doctrine
that they, followed in the,
in the times of the cold War.
So that's a distinction I would make.
So what we could say,
just to clarify this further
for everybody watching and listening,
is that in countries like,
I think the Scandinavian countries
are probably the best example of this.
The first thing we should note is that
they're relatively small countries.
And until recently they were
relatively homogenous ethnically.
And that makes governance
more straightforward.
The systems simply aren't as complex
because there are fewer people, and
there is more of, implicit
consensus on which way is up
and which way is down, let's say.
But the Scandinavian countries
like Canada,
the classic socialists,
we're really free market
people of things considered believed in
private property, more or less.
And but we're more interested
than the libertarians or the conservatives
in producing a, a broad
and encompassing social safety net.
And so most of the political action
in Canada had to do
with the expansion
of the social safety net.
And that was what the left wingers
and the labor union types
were pushing for, with,
with a certain degree of success
and the the distinction you're drawing on.
And you referred to a couple of Austrian
economists, Hayek and Mrs..
Is that the communists go full fledged
planned economy, the full fledged planned
economy route, and they are not in favor
of private property.
They believe that an untrammeled free
market,
it ends up concentrating economic power
in the hands
of a very small number of people,
and that replacing that with a planned
economy would fix that problem,
which it certainly doesn't and can't.
And I know the Austrians who you referred
to, also make the case that
a planned
economy is something that appeals
to people who are very presumptuous
in their intellect, because
the fabrication of any
given commodity consumer item,
let's say, or commodity for that
matter, is complex, almost beyond,
well, it's complex beyond comprehend.
And unless you have a distributed system
of pricing to make rational, intelligent
decisions, your economy will eventually
grind to a cataclysmic halt.
So I think about it
as a computational problem.
Right.
Is that the
and I think this fits in very well
with the Austrian economists
line of thinking is like,
do you want to have a distributed network
of computation,
each person calculating their own
hierarchy of values, each person
with the eyes on the particulars
of their local situation,
sum all that together
in some distributed manner,
and allow decisions to be made that way or
do you want to put decision making power
in the hands of a small group of people
who can't hope to know what's going on?
You know, I think the Central Committee,
the Soviet Central
Committee, was making something like 300
pricing decisions a day.
And like, I've run companies
where we've tried to price our offerings
and just pricing.
One thing is almost impossible.
And you have to do that in concert
with your market.
You don't know
what something is worth.
The best you could do is find out
what people are willing to pay for it,
given all the other things that they're
trying to accomplish simultaneously.
So okay, so the communist types,
they're focusing on planned economy.
Now let's go back to Venezuela.
So before the socialist revolution
took place, in your opinion,
how was Venezuela doing?
So Venezuela is an interesting case
because it had the highest per capita
income in Latin America in 1970.
And it was, the country
of the largest degree of economic freedom.
you can measure that.
the Fraser Institute in Canada does
that work of measuring economic freedom.
And in 1970, Venezuela was 14,
14 in the world
in terms of economic freedom, it was about
like 90 countries, more or less,
that they were measuring back then.
Chile was one of the last countries
because we had had the socialist
experiment of sort of other agenda,
which was an attempt to impose
a totalitarian communist system in Chile.
And we were last in the country,
and we had hyperinflation
and scarcity of basic goods and services
and so on and so forth.
So it was a complete catastrophe
that ended up in the coup
of 1973, led by General Pinochet.
But Venezuela, over time
and over the decades,
especially after they nationalized
in the 70s, the oil industry.
We have to remember, Venezuela has one
of the largest oil reserves in the world.
they nationalized it
and they started falling
in the ranking of economic freedom
systematically.
So by the time Chavez came to power in
1988, Venezuela
was doing very poorly
in the rankings of economic freedom.
You had a very kleptocratic,
kleptocratic, corrupt, system
that, you know, a rent seeking society.
Let's say everyone was trying to live out
of the government hands on handouts and
and corrupt deals between the corporate
interests and the politicians.
And, Chavez was, elected.
He had been, a military, a soldier
who had attempted a coup in 1992
against Carlos Andres Perez.
So, so he was a gold star,
what we call a gold star in Spanish.
So, someone who tried to overthrow
a democratically elected
president, and install a, dictatorship.
So everyone knew who Chavez was.
So many people died in 1992,
and he ended up in prison.
But, well meaning
central leftist in, Venezuela.
pardon him so he could go out of jail.
And then he went to see Fidel Castro.
And Fidel Castro recognized immediately
that he had,
you know, a puppet that he could guide in
order to, to take control over Venezuela.
So Castro and Cuba, they have been
the masterminds behind
what is going on, in this country.
And they have, you know,
extracted
huge sums of wealth from Venezuela,
because after the collapse of the Soviet
Union, at some point Russia stopped
funding, Cuban, the Cuban dictatorship.
And so Venezuela and played that role.
And Chavez had saw in Fidel
Castro a father figure for him.
And this is really an important,
thing because he was loyal to Fidel
until the very end.
And the intelligence services from Cuba,
who are very effective,
we have to say, in consolidating power,
they have been there in Cuba
for over 60 years.
So they know what they're doing.
These are the people advising the regime
as to what to do,
to deal with the opposition and to purge
the military and things like that.
but Venezuela was already,
in a situation where they have
where they have lost, their economic
freedom and the per capita incomes
as compared to other countries in Latin
America started to fall dramatically.
And while Chile embraced
free market reforms,
especially influenced
by the Chicago School of Economics, Milton
Friedman and Arnold Harburg
or George Stigler and people like that,
and we became the wealthiest country
in per capita terms in Latin America.
And, so you can see that,
in the 70s, Chile was at the bottom
of the economic freedom ranking.
We went up to the top,
even top ten at some point,
and we became the wealthiest country
in Latin America
and Venezuela, the complete opposite
that went from being the first country
in Latin America
to now the last country in the ranking
in the world, 162
among 162 countries that are measured.
And it's a complete disaster.
And and this is socialism.
This is what I mean.
So the Nordic countries are really on
the top,
countries in terms of economic freedom.
These are not really socialist countries.
And I remember Bernie Sanders
saying this all the time.
And and he got a response.
I think it was a prime minister
from Sweden who told him, we are
we are not socialist
because you have corporate tax in,
in, in Sweden
that is lower than in the United States,
more or less
in some of these Nordic countries.
Do you have so what they do is they tax
very heavily for personal income.
Right.
And this is I don't like it
because you have lots of, capital,
human capital flight,
people who are very qualified,
who go to the United States
for other parts,
but still
they're very productive countries
and they have very large degrees
of economic freedom.
And economic freedom means free trade,
stable currency, protection
of property rights,
reasonable size of government and so on.
so it is it is a social democracy
like,
Anthony Giddens type of social democracy.
What Tony Blair and Bill Clinton
where at the time, at some point or German
Chancellor or Gerhard Schroeder,
who who made all the reforms in Germany,
allowing Germany in the 2002
to then experience,
a boom and economic boom,
that merkel benefited from that.
Okay.
So, so but here
what we have is the extreme far
left experiments,
that are very anti-capitalist.
And this is, what you see in Venezuela
now is the consolidation of this ideology.
And we have to remember that Maduro
was chosen by Chavez as his successor.
And the reason for this was that Maduro
compared to the del Cabello,
who is another criminal
and one of the main leaders of this
soulless cartel,
Maduro is is a doctrinaire.
He was the hardcore socialist,
and he was following a first minister
to the Chavez administration,
and he was instrumental in building up
the whole network of, of Venezuela.
And that Chavez more in an international
on an international level in Europe,
in, in, in Asia in different parts.
And, and Chavez aligned himself
very rapidly
with, Russia and with Iran and with China.
so, so
this is part of the Cold War 2.0
that we are experiencing.
Venezuela is playing for them and
and now we have
and I want to stress this, Jordan,
because it's important,
you have a minimum
wage of $3 in Venezuela.
You have accumulated inflation
of 2,000,000% or more.
You have, collapse of 70% of GDP, 70%.
You have a collapse of over 80%
of oil production in Venezuela.
And they have squandered
almost $1 trillion
and and wealth,
because when Chavez came to power,
you had a barrel of oil at $8 or so,
and it it skyrocketed to over $120.
So only because of that,
they got almost $1 trillion.
They destroyed all all of that wealth.
And people say, oh, this is,
you know, Caribbean type of politics.
This is the result of socialism everywhere
you go.
And you see what the socialists,
when they implement this system.
And again, I don't mean the Nordic type
of welfare state,
which is not socialism,
not real socialism, at least,
they, they destroy the country
where they, where they run it.
It's, it's
you can see it in eastern Germany
as compared to western Germany
during the Cold War.
It was a very poor country
compared to western Germany and so on.
I mean, everyone knows the different
examples North Korea, South Korea
and so on and so forth.
But it's important to remember that,
Fidel Castro, Cuba
and Russia, Vladimir Putin
and Iran, Hezbollah are behind Maduro.
I have to stress this because
this is not only a Venezuelan problem.
This is going to be a crucial problem
for the United States
and for national security in the United
Well let's dig into that one of the other.
So there's there's three four things
I'd like to cover as we move forward.
Right now.
I want to talk
more about the opposition in Venezuela
and what you think people outside
Venezuela can do to aid the opposition.
I want to talk about the ordinary life
of the typical Venezuelan.
Now, I want to talk about where
that trillion dollars went.
And maybe we can do that.
We'll talking about your claim,
for example, that the Maduro government
has basically also become a narco
dictatorship.
Now, you know, you made a variety
of extremely serious allegations.
The misuse of $1 trillion
certainly being one of them.
But then you also said, well,
the Maduro government is in
bed with, with the narco cartels.
And see, I don't think people in North
America exactly understand what that means
or exactly how nefarious
those cartels are, and what a danger
they pose well, to the stability
of the entire Western Hemisphere.
But then you also added to that
the fact that Maduro is in cahoots
with, well, Cuba, Iran, Russia
and then Hezbollah.
And so this is a lot for people to digest,
because it sounds like a stew generated
by a conspiracy theorist in a sense.
Right, because there's almost nothing
that is bad that you're not
accusing the Maduro government
of participating in.
And so the easiest thing for a listener
to do is to just say no to all that.
So we should walk through those issues
one by one.
I guess the thing I'm most curious about
to begin with, let's do it in this order.
What the hell happened to $1 trillion?
That's an awful lot of money.
Where where do you think most of that,
especially given that you have a 70%
collapse in GDP
and an 80% reduction in oil production?
It's like.
And then everybody in Venezuela is poor,
and yet $1 trillion came pouring in.
So what's your sense
of who that money went to.
And like what
sort of people did that money go to
and what are they doing with that money?
the money funded some very existentialist
social programs at some point
during the Chavez administration.
but a large part of it went to fund,
revolutionary groups and political parties
all over Latin America.
We have to remember that
the Castro vision,
which is the important, figure,
I think, here
the Castro mission was to spread
the revolution all over Latin America.
And in his, worldview,
what he was doing,
believe it or not, is, Chris
Christ's work on, on earth
like he was bringing Paradise to earth.
He said that literally many times.
So Castro had been educated
by the Jesuits in Cuba,
and he believed that capitalism and,
you know,
liberal democracy, individualism
were the sources of corruption,
that Christ was the first communist
revolutionary.
And this is, by the way,
something very similar to what Pope
Francis said at some point
when he argued that it was the Communist
who thought like the Christians.
He said that literally, Pope Francis,
who is, I guess, with himself.
So and Castro was promising,
to create this,
but this had to be
an expansionist project.
So when Chavez came to power
and he had all of these resources as,
in her in his pockets,
plenty of them went to Cuba, of course,
to sustain the island.
But then he started supporting different,
regimes or movements and terrorist
organizations all over Latin America.
At some point,
I had this conversation, conversation
with former President Alberto Reeb,
who is also a good friend.
At some point
he told me I was the only non leftist,
non socialist,
president in most of, South America.
And it's true, and all of these regimes,
even the Kirchner dynasty in dynasty
in Argentina, the corrupt Kirchner dynasty
got some, you know, loans, special
loans from the Venezuelan government
when they needed money. So.
And they stole a lot of money.
I mean, they have the travesties and
their families have billions of dollars,
in and on bank accounts,
in, in Europe,
in the US in different parts.
And, and so, it's amazing
you saw Ferraris in, in Caracas
while people were starving.
You have a almost 8
million people have left Venezuela
because you don't find things to eat.
8 million is a quarter of the population
who have fled, left the country
because of the, desperate situation.
And you have over 80% poverty rate.
And, and so,
a large
part of the money, as I said,
went to fund all of this, movement,
but also within Venezuela, they started
creating a parallel army, the circus.
What you are Janos Chavez
very early on, understood,
probably
because Castro advised him to do so,
that he needed a parallel troops
in order to contain any threat
that could come from the within the army.
And he was right.
In 2002,
the army staged a coup against Chavez,
and Chavez was, taken into custody.
He was imprisoned.
But then some generals,
you know, regretted the decision of,
getting rid of him.
And they reinstalled Chavez.
And then he, of course, used the muscle
of the intelligence services of Cuba to
to purge the military as much as he could.
But he was never entirely sure that there
would not be traitors within the army.
So he created this circular value,
Mariano's, which are armed.
And these are the guys, by the way,
that you see nowadays in the videos
and in the videos attacking, Venezuelans
from the opposition
who are just protesting on the streets
and they are shooting at them,
they are taking them in
and torturing them.
Most of the people doing the dirty job
are these, Cyclospora arenas,
which is the Bolivarian
circles, you know, and so
and that's,
a lot of money that went there also.
And, you know,
you can squander wealth with no end.
I mean, it's it's, if you are
if you are supporting other countries
and you want to install regimes
all over Latin America that are favorable,
favorable to you, I mean, $1
trillion is not even a lot of money.
you know, but the worst part
and I finished the point with this
is that we saw people all over the West,
in the 2000, when it was already clear
that Chavez was a dictator,
that he was completely undermining the,
separation of powers.
He was imprisoning, of the opposition,
and he was violating human rights
and so on.
We saw very famous people
like Joseph Stiglitz, for instance,
coming to Venezuela
and praising Chavez for what he was doing.
And he did the same, by the way,
with Kirchner's with, Fidel Castro.
he has been a long time
supporter of the Castro dictatorship,
and he now writes
books called The Road to Freedom
and and and pretense
pretends to be the savior of of the West
or or the killer or the undertaker
of Leon liberalism or something like that.
But you could read the New York Times,
you could read different BBC,
you could see different news.
media outlets or even on television.
They were sympathetic to Chavez
when he started doing this,
and it was already clear
where he was going.
So, I, I share the frustration
of the Venezuelan friends
in the resistance because,
the West has not, shown, you know,
one standard for everyone when it
when it's the leftist,
they, they, they support them
or they turn a blind eye to what
Are you tired of feeling sluggish, rundown
or just not your best self?
Take control of your health
and vitality today with balance of nature.
With balance of nature.
There's never been a more convenient
dietary supplement
to ensure you get a wide variety of fruits
and vegetables every day.
Balance of nature
takes fruits and vegetables.
They freeze,
dry them, turn them into a powder,
and then they put them into a capsule.
The capsules are completely devoid
of additives.
Fillers, extract synthetics, pesticides,
or added sugar.
The only thing in balance of nature fruit
and veggie capsules are fruits
and veggies.
Right now you can order with promo code
Jordan to get 35% off your first order.
Plus get a free bottle of fiber and spice.
Experience balance of nature for yourself
today.
Go to Balanced nature.com
and use promo code Jordan for 35% off
your first order as a preferred customer.
Plus, get a free bottle of Vibrant Spice.
That's balance of nature.
Dot com promo code Jordan
for 35% off your first preferred order,
plus a free bottle of fiber and spice.
Okay, so let's talk about.
Let's move from that.
So you accounted for a fair
bit of the spending?
A lot of it has disappeared
into the pockets of corrupt politicians.
You see exactly the same thing.
For example,
with the Palestinian leadership,
all of those people end up with
billions of dollars in their accounts.
And so that's appalling
beyond comprehension.
They sacrifice their own people
and they often live elsewhere.
And so the socialist redistribution
of wealth ends up meaning that everyone's
much more poor than they used to be,
except the small minority of people
who have power
instead of the evil capitalists,
and they have untold wealth
at their fingertips.
And then you also said
the money was distributed
around South America and Central America
to destabilize
and to promote revolution,
and maybe elsewhere in the world as well.
Okay.
So, so
and that you can spend
an awful lot of money doing that
and cause an awful lot of trouble.
And you also pointed out
that that's been aided and abetted by the
what would you call them
useful idiots of the Western media.
And so we'll we'll get back to that.
Let's turn to the
another element of the corruption.
And that's the you described Maduro
as as a narco
at the Maduro regime, as a narco
dictatorship.
So talked to everyone,
if you would, a little bit about the
role of the cartels
in Central and South America,
because that's not something that's
well understood in North America at all.
way, people who.
Who think I'm making these things up,
they can Google it.
It's all online.
This is, you can see in very serious,
media, you can read articles about this.
so the United States,
they know about this, about
the Iran connection, about, you know,
the drug cartels, and so on and so forth.
But,
you know, now in Latin, in Latin America,
because this is including Mexico,
we have, a problem that more and more
the cartels are taking over politics,
and you don't need to do the revolution.
And actually, this is really interesting.
Chavez used to be a proponent
of what he called 21st century socialism.
That is what he used to talk about.
We are doing 21st century socialism.
So what did that mean after the fall,
the fall of the Berlin Wall?
they came all together in, in Brazil,
you know, this whole Bible forum with
and so on.
And, and they said, okay,
we are going to use democracy.
We are going to use democracy in order to,
create the socialist system.
We are not going to fight
a Revolutionary war necessarily,
but we are going to use it
in order to come to power.
And then once we are there,
we established our our system.
And we never leave if we can, if we can,
avoid to leave, we are going to stay.
Okay.
So, the cartels have been playing
an important role in this because,
at some point, Chavez needed them
and he offered refuge
to the Colombian cartels from the,
attacks that the Uribe administration,
where it was, you know, engaging in
and they would come into Venezuelan
territory and Chavez would protect them.
And, and and the Colombian army couldn't
go into Venezuelan territory
because that would have meant
a probably war with the Venezuelan army.
So they started with that.
And the cartels, also started
channeling money to the regime.
And at some point,
the regime
itself, especially with Dark Coelho,
who is a very high up in the Maduro
administration, became, cartel boss.
Now you have free agents in, in Venezuela,
but also in Mexico.
In Mexico, for instance, 30% of
the Mexican territory is controlled
by the cartels, 30%.
in Venezuela you have complete
regions, complete states
that are being run by the cartels.
Okay.
And and now we have a, a country
like Chile
that used to be a safe country,
like the most advanced country.
The cartels are taking over,
complete regions of the country.
with their guns and so on.
Now these cartels have, again, connections
with Hezbollah.
They work, they work with them.
And, and Hezbollah
is creating now in, in Bolivia,
which is also a far left administration
and which is a big producer of, of Coke
Bolivia.
They are creating or establishing,
facilities to produce drones,
that are for, for military purposes.
But also we have to remember that
Bolivia and Venezuela.
I know this for a fact in Venezuela,
but I think it's also true for Bolivia.
They have uranium,
which is important for the Iranians,
for the nuclear program
that Iran wants to develop.
So the cartels have become
a source of funding.
They have become the government
in the case of, Venezuela.
And they don't want to lose their,
business model.
And that's why
I think they are not going to,
accept the transition to democracy
in Venezuela, but they are destabilizing
the whole of Latin America
because they are business.
They are expanding everywhere
they can in order to make more profits.
And a country like Chile, for instance,
which used to be like,
you know, free from this problem,
now has become the third
largest exporter of cocaine to Europe
because we are integrated,
with the rest of the world.
We have many free trade agreements.
And so you have ships here
that go everywhere.
And we have no basically no control
on the border with Peru and Bolivia.
And so they bring all this cocaine
through the northern border,
and then they export it via
the Chilean ports
to the United States,
to Europe and everywhere.
And so, this is corrupting everything
in, in Latin America.
And I've hurt and I think this is,
this is, in the media also that the trend
that I wear, which is, you know,
one of these cartels and organized crime,
groups are also
operating in New York
and other cities in the United States.
of course, why not?
And if it's easy to get into
the United States, it's a huge market.
Why not?
So this is the problem.
We are we are becoming a narco region.
Our our region controlled by the narcos.
And,
politicians are working for the narcos.
And the problem with this is that Iran,
Russia and China don't care about this.
They just used these cartels
or the connections
with the cartels for their own purposes.
And that's why you see the first countries
recognizing Maduro's fraud,
saying that he was democratically elected,
where China, Russia and Iran,
these three countries.
Okay. So.
Okay.
So let's speak to something more practical
and psychological for a moment. Or
so many people
who are watching
and listening will be wondering, at least
in some corner of their imagination,
why the hell they should care.
You know,
there's lots of things that are besetting
the typical American voter at the moment.
The situation in the United States
is far from stable.
I would say the same thing about Canada.
There are many, catastrophes and looming
catastrophes to be concerned about.
And what happens typically
is that anything to do
with South in Central
America takes a pretty
well.
It takes a back seat, to say the least.
So, I mean, when we met in Chile,
you were obviously interested
in pursuing this conversation as I was.
And what would you say to people
who are listening in the United States
and Canada,
let's say, and elsewhere in the world,
about why they should care about
what's happening with regards to China
and Iran and Russia in South America
and the cartels mean South America has
always been a relatively unstable place
from the perspective of the northern West.
And in some ways,
this is par for the par for the course.
I mean, the Cold War
has been being played out
in a manner similar to this
for as long as I can possibly remember.
In what?
What is it that you want to bring
to the attention of the typical person
in Canada?
In the US, with regards to what's happening down south, and why should they care?
the.
The thing is that the United States
used to care a lot about Latin America.
A lot during the Cold War.
They intervened.
Every country in order
to prevent them from becoming communist
and Soviet aligned countries.
Because the KGB back then had the theory
that the Cold War would be won.
in the, in the Third World, basically,
and and Henry Kissinger, for instance,
when Salvador Allende in Chile
was elected in 1970,
he was the first Marxist Marxist president
ever democratically elected in history.
And Henry Kissinger
said, and I'm quoting him literally,
the, the,
the election is the greatest threat
that has, occur in the Western Hemisphere
in a long time
because he understood that, you know,
this could have a domino effect.
Other countries would follow not only in
Latin America, but also in Europe.
But now you have the following problem.
the United States, after September 11th,
they the country completely
forgot about Latin America.
We don't exist anymore.
Okay. For them in terms of foreign policy.
And I'm not really exaggerating.
if if September 11th would not happen,
have happened,
I think the history of Latin America
would be completely different right now.
so they forgot about us, and now
they have Russia and they have China,
and they have other problems that are they
look more important than Latin America.
But the thing is that the main migration
forwards in the United States are Latinos.
And if the continent continues to this
time, it to destabilize,
because of narco cartels,
because of people like Maduro
and so on, you will have
you will have millions more people
coming into the United States, millions.
And among them you will have
the Iranian Hezbollah people and
and so on and so forth.
So from that point of view, it is
really important for national security.
and then when they are in the United
States,
Latinos tend to favor
the Democratic Party.
Two thirds, of Latinos, they vote
for Democrat for the Democratic Party.
I think this is changing a little bit,
but not enough.
so if you have, a change,
a substantial change
in the demographics in the United States
and we know this is happening,
this will have, political impact that is
really, really will be very substantial.
Why do Latinos vote
for the Democratic Party?
Because
when we immigrate to the United States,
we bring our belief systems with us.
It's not like because where in the US
suddenly will of Thomas Jefferson.
That's not how it works.
they favor
the welfare state and government handouts.
And I'm not saying everyone,
they are moderate.
Most of them are very hardworking people
and so on.
And I mean, we cannot complain.
And most people hate Maduro, for instance,
of Venezuelan who have escaped.
but the point is
that if I was an American,
I would be worried that the,
cultural landscape in my country
would be changing so much because of this
migration force that is coming into
the United States, that at some point
it will be politically unmanageable
for someone who wants to keep your country
the way it was in terms of,
you know, the idea of the institution
of limited government, so on, so,
so which is when they speak
about the purple states,
people moving from, from California
to Texas, for instance.
And they, they, they tell them, don't,
don't vote for what you left for.
No. So, so but is the same with Latinos
going into the United States?
it's the largest minority.
And it is really important to, to,
to have a stable region.
So you don't have this influx of, of, of,
of people coming into your country first,
but then also, because it poses,
as I said, a risk for national security.
And on top of that, geopolitically,
Latin America is extremely important
in this Second World War
because supply chains are globalizing.
Now, you know,
you have this trade war going on
with China, and you need countries
where you have
you can produce your stuff,
you need raw materials.
China is buying
everything in Latin America.
They are buying ports in, in in Peru,
they are buying mines in Chile.
they are buying everything you can.
Even Panama, everywhere they are,
they are buying up natural resources.
And Americans are looking the other way.
So I think this is not,
this is the backyard.
There is a reason why you had the Monroe
Doctrine at some point in 1832.
What they said, okay,
we are not intervening in Latin America,
but we will not accept any foreign power
also,
going to Latin America
and intervening there and,
you know, having this, this region
as a, as their sphere of influence.
But the Monroe Doctrine
seems not to exist anymore,
that this is a new development.
For most of its history, the United States
has really cared about Latin America
because they understood how important it
was for them, for their national security
and for the national interest.
Well, I think we made the
great mistake in the West of assuming that
because the Soviet Union collapsed,
the victory over the ideology that it made
manifest
was not only complete,
but in some ways self-evident.
Right. Victory had been attained.
The end of history, let's say.
And it turns out that the spirit
of envious of the envious radicals was in
no real way diminished by the cataclysmic,
catastrophe of the Soviet Union.
In fact,
to some degree quite the opposite, because
when I was younger
and the Soviet Union
was still in full operation,
you could point to the Soviet Union
as an object lesson
in the dangers
of an anti-free market ideology.
But now the Soviet Union has disappeared.
And so it's much more difficult to
to point to something
that's happening right now.
Well, you could point to Venezuela,
you can point to North Korea,
but they're their economies that didn't
have the scale or the presence,
obviously, of the Soviet Union.
And so all of this has gone
back underground that the
the attractiveness of the communist
revolutionary ideas
hasn't seemed to diminish at all.
So now your point is, okay,
so let's summarize this.
Well, it's probably not a good idea
to distribute $1 trillion to radical
leftist utopian criminal dictatorships
all over South America and the world.
That seems like a bad idea
if you're trying to maintain a certain
degree of stability,
even in your own country,
that manifests itself
in all manner of economic collapse
that drives migration northward.
We've seen tremendous pressure
on the American border,
and by all appearances,
especially if Kamala Harris wins.
however, that might play itself out.
That's only going to get worse.
And so the the idea that the U.S.
and Canada,
by implication, can separate themselves
from the geopolitical occurrences
in South America is a
that's a fool's delusion.
And that's especially the case
if it's Venezuela with all that oil
money, let's say,
and oil that the rest of the world
needs is in bed,
not only with, narco cartels
who are brutal
criminals beyond the comprehension
of any normal person to imagine,
but also simultaneously in bed with Iran,
which is one seriously bad actor.
Russia, which is basically at war
with the West, and China,
which is the biggest threat
to freedom that the world has ever seen
since the Soviet Union.
And so that's all playing itself
out in South America
and driving migration northward.
And I would add, in the end.
Jordan. If.
If China, Iran and. And Russia.
Your main enemies of the western world
really care about Latin America.
You should too, you know, because they are
they are here.
They are.
They are involved in these countries.
They are investing tons of money
at least the Chinese,
Russia is sending executives.
Even the Wagner Group
has been seen in Venezuela.
they they know that they need strongholds
close to the United States,
and they want to destabilize the region,
because they also know
that this destabilizes the United States.
And so,
I mean, it's this so obvious, but,
I don't know,
I even in the conservative movement
in, in the US, this is not understood.
I think someone like Marco
Rubio understands this very well.
or maybe Ted Cruz, but I think the,
traditional Republican politicians
are they don't understand this.
They they don't see how how
big of a threat of a threat
we can become if China and Russia
and Iran, they take over these countries.
And by the way, we have,
some of the largest reserves in natural
gas in the world, copper,
lithium, silver,
gold, whatever oil, all these things
you have here
in manufacturing capacity
in Latin America is also very strong.
so and you will need that at some point.
And we are relatively
young population still in Latin America
as compared to Europe
or even the United States or Canada.
We are growing old, very rapidly.
So for all of these reasons,
I think it's not a smart
move to to just ignore
what's going on in your backyard.
It's never
Starting a business can be tough,
but thanks to Shopify, running your online
storefront is easier than ever.
Shopify is the global commerce platform
that helps you sell
at every stage of your business.
From the launch your online shop stage
all the way to the did
we just hit a million orders stage?
Shopify is here to help you grow.
Our marketing team uses Shopify every day
to sell our merchandise, and we love
how easy it is to add more items, ship
products, and track conversions
with Shopify.
Customize your online store to your style
with flexible templates
and powerful tools
alongside an endless list of integrations
and third party apps like on demand
printing, accounting and chat bots.
Shopify helps
you turn browsers into buyers
with the internet's best converting
checkout.
Up to 36% better compared to other leading
e-commerce platforms,
no matter how big you want to grow.
Shopify gives you everything
you need to take control
and take your business to the next level.
Sign up for a $1 per month trial period
at shopify.com/gbp all lowercase.
Go to shopify.com/gbp.
Now to grow your business
no matter what stage you're in.
That's shopify.com/gbp.
Well that was certainly
my sense when I toured
through South America for that.
For what that's worth
I mean it you know it's.
It's obvious that what's playing out
there needs to be attended to.
Okay.
So let's, let's flip back to Venezuela
specifically for a moment.
So could you give us an account,
for example, of what ordinary
life is like for a Venezuelan,
for the typical Venezuelan citizen?
Now, you said that 25% of the population
has decided
to vote with their feet,
and that's an awful lot of people.
And that you said that, you know,
the GDP is collapsed
by 70%, oil production is down 80%.
And, and that 80% of the population
lives in poverty.
And so what is what is the typical
what what is typical reality
for a Venezuelan citizen now?
Because we never hear
about it, we have no idea.
would expect in a socialist Paradise.
It's basically is
you don't have enough food to eat.
Calorie intake in Venezuela
has collapsed over the last 15 years.
20 years?
you don't have medicines,
you don't have, hospitals
that are functioning,
you have no grid, electric, electricity.
You have problems all the time.
in Caracas, everywhere in a country
that is very hot,
many regions of Venezuela are very hot.
You don't have air conditioning
or any of that.
and only people
who can get access to dollars because.
Because you are there are remittances
going to to the country.
They they manage to survive.
but this is the reason why, almost
a quarter of the population I have left.
And if Maduro is reinstalled in January,
you will have another couple of million
living Venezuela.
By the way, this is going to happen,
and we are expecting that all over
Latin America.
you have,
no rule of law, civil rule of law.
So you basically have a regime
that controls the judiciary,
the legislative, everything, the police,
any day someone can knock at your door
and to take you, a prisoner,
and you disappear
and no one knows
anything about you anymore.
you have to be.
If you are in the opposition, you have to
be hiding and and and very careful.
Even I I'm on a blacklist, I was told.
And that's one of the reasons
why I've never been back to Venezuela
since last time I was there, 2014,
even if I'm not really relevant
within the country,
but because I have argued against
the Maduro regime in different media
all over the the West probably
at least in the United States,
in Latin America and Spain.
I'm not welcome.
So so imagine people who are living there,
my friends are hiding from the regime.
you have, many families
that have been torn apart,
completely destroyed
because, you know,
let me tell you a also an anecdote to,
that is really interesting
for the audience.
I was once in Miami and I took an Uber
and I started talking to the driver,
and I thought that he was very,
well-educated and really intellectual,
like, more than the normal.
he knew a lot about law, for instance.
And I said, what what do you
what did you do in back in Venezuela?
I was a minister of the Supreme Court
in Venezuela,
a member of the Supreme Court
of Justice in Venezuela.
And now I am your Uber driver.
So this is a reality of millions
of Venezuelans, you know, not only,
poor people or middle class people,
but also people who are very successful.
So they had their jobs,
they had their companies,
and they lost everything.
They lost their families,
they lost everything.
And many of them have families, members
that have been killed by the regime also.
So, and,
and so the situation is so desperate
that I think Venezuelans
are going to fight to the last breath
in order to make change possible.
And Maria Corina.
Marcelo, by the way,
I said this the five days until the end.
And so I don't
know how this is going to look like.
But if if the Biden administration
does not,
convince Maduro and the regime to,
transition back to democracy,
you will maybe have a bloodbath
even worse than the one you have now.
By the way,
I point that this important, Chavez,
when he was in government,
he disarmed the Venezuelan population.
He banned guns
for every citizen in Venezuela.
The only people who could have guns
where he's his tax, basically.
And this is very early on.
Bolivar knows the parallel armed groups
that they have.
funded and and they were
financing.
And so now you have a situation
where Venezuelans don't
have even a pistol to defend themselves
from these hordes of,
of assassins that their regime
is sending to kill them
or to imprison them.
And they have over 2000 people in
the last weeks have been imprisoned,
mostly
young people who want a better future.
So this is what Venezuela looks like
right now.
It's it's it's hell on Earth.
Let's talk about the structure
of the opposition.
So it's Maria Corina machado.
I'm butchering that name, obviously.
And it's difficult
from the outside to understand because.
Tell me how the last election,
who was put forward
as opposition in the last election,
what role does she play?
What threat does she currently face
and what well, what
what can people from the outside
do to shed light on this and to help?
Goretti, Marcelo, has been, the main
opposition leader for over a decade.
I would say even a decade and a half.
Even if at some point in 2013,
for instance, after Chavez
died, you had an election
where Enrique Capriles,
lost by a small margin to Maduro.
But Maduro stole that election.
They stole millions of votes.
This is not the first time
that this happens.
and so and the reason is
because the system in Venezuela,
it requires that you have,
a sort of an ID and you go and vote,
but the system is not integrated.
So in the sense,
you can with, with different IDs,
you can vote in different parts.
So one member of the of the government
got like, let's say 100 IDs
and he could go to 100 different places
and vote for the same candidate.
And this is the way they stole
the last election to 2013.
and back
then, population wanted to rebel,
but, Capriles said, no, let's stay home.
We got we have nothing to do here.
And so it gave, oxygen to the regime.
and Maria
Corina has always been the voice of,
I think, reason and courage
because she was willing to fight.
But the opposition was very fragmented
and has been for a long time.
This is the first time that they are
all together, together against the regime.
so which is, which is very good.
And, and she has become
the undisputed leader of the opposition,
even though with of the Gonzalez is
the press is a candidate
and the president
the person elect is Eduardo Gonzalez.
But why?
Because Maduro banned
Maria Corina from running as president.
So. And
they have been doing this forever
in Venezuela since Chavez came to power.
So, so Maria Corina endorsed
Gonzalez to the election and Gonzalez,
no one
we all know for, with a distance of over
30 points.
So, with a difference
of over the 30 points.
So, so now the opposition, at least
they are all together against the,
the regime.
but the main, the main face of the
opposition is Maria Correa Marcelo, which,
by the way, deserves a Nobel Prize
for peace because she, she has been
so courageous and trying to, to,
bring democratic change to Venezuela.
But she's not going to get it
because she is not left out leftist.
So I think there is not a big hope
that she would get this.
But, she faces
now the possibility of being imprisoned
and who knows, maybe being killed
and she's
willing to give her life for the cause.
I mean, she's not going to turn herself
over to the regime, justice.
you know, I mean, like,
and I think that she will try to,
to prevent them from, capturing her,
but she could be imprisoned
and maybe killed.
so this is what she's facing.
Maria Corina So she had
she had Eduardo Gonzalez run in her stead.
In essence.
Is she in hiding at the moment.
So tell me about Maria Karina.
So why is she.
What is it about her
that's made her a popular figure?
I'd like to know some more about her
background.
And also, you know why she doesn't?
Why she doesn't quit.
Now, you.
You explained, at least to some degree,
why she's still alive.
You believe that it would be a scandal
of such preposterous magnitude
if there was something that happened
to her, that the Maduro regime is afraid
that would turn international attention
on them
with sufficient drama
to actually be a threat to the continued
stability of their regime.
So she's protected in so far
as that's the case.
but what?
Tell me about who she is.
You know, you mentioned yourself earlier
in this podcast that she's being tarred
and feathered like anybody
who isn't a communist,
for being far right now,
because that's happening everywhere.
And so but again, you know, people
the the far right
epithet is a very effective one.
And it doesn't take much agitation,
especially
from the mainstream press,
in order to make that accusation stick.
And so it's clear that to the degree
that you're trustworthy,
you trust Maria Karina.
Tell us about her so that people
have some sense of who it is
that is standing in opposition to Maduro.
that she's the most courageous women.
I think these maybe many people
will think this is an overstatement,
but I think this is.
She's the most courageous
women in politics right now in the world.
I cannot imagine someone
with more courage in her than hers.
I mean, this is I mean, she's
unbelievably courageous, and charismatic.
And so she has this force.
So she's like a force of nature.
And this is why the regime
is so afraid of her.
and and she has managed
to bring the whole opposition together
and to create a movement of such magnitude
in Venezuela that even the dictatorship
with all the guns and so on.
is shaking because they are
they are afraid that this is going to
in the end, you know,
bring change in Venezuela and, and,
and her charisma is so powerful
that even members of the armed forces,
have backed her.
That's, by the way,
one of the reasons why they had the access
to the documents
showing that they won the presidency,
because members in the military were
leaking these documents to the opposition,
and they have imprisoned over
100, 100 soldiers are in prison,
and they humiliate them
and they tortured them
and so on, because they are behind
Maria Corina and not behind Maduro.
so, but she is in favor of free markets,
which is not the case
with most of the opposition in Venezuela.
People might remember Leopoldo Lopez, who
who was in prison for a long time,
and it was a scandal all over the world.
I believe he's now in Spain,
but I once gave a speech with Leopoldo
Lopez, father in European Parliament,
and Leopoldo Lopez
father was defending socialism,
which was to me, it was incredible.
He was saying, no, socialism does not do
what Chavez has done or what.
And and it's exactly
the opposite is the case.
And he was very nice,
when it came to this and Enrique Capriles
the same thing,
the last opposition leader, before
White Door and Ricky Capriles,
who lost in 2013, the other day, tweeted
along these lines like Chavez
was the good guy and Maduro
is the bad guy, which is a narrative
that the left is trying to create
in order to save the socialist revolution
in Venezuela is the same narrative
they did with Lenin and Stalin.
Oh, Lenin was a good guy,
but Stalin was a criminal.
A Stalin was a, you know,
coming from the proletarian
who didn't know anything.
And he was he was a criminal.
They are doing the same
with Chavez. Maduro.
And to me,
it was shocking that someone like April,
who is in the opposition
and who wants regime change, would fall
for this crap and this trap.
so Maria
Corina has never conceded anything.
She has always been very coherent.
She believes in liberal democracy,
in the rule of law and the free market.
I guess that qualifies you
as a far right nowadays. So
it doesn't happen only to her.
I guess.
But, it is really appalling that
we read this sort of nonsense from,
the established media.
there isn't no one more Democratic.
She has.
She hasn't called for a rebellion
against the government
to a violent march towards Miraflores
Palace to depose Maduro.
She hasn't done any of that.
She never did that.
It's just peaceful protest.
That's why I'm saying she should.
She should get the Nobel Peace Prize.
really?
Because she's risking your life
for millions of Venezuelans.
And so you will never.
And I hope you you meet her one day
because you will never met a woman
with more, you know, not only courage,
but also integrity.
Thinks she do a podcast.
Well let's see if we can
make that happen. Yes.
You mean like the UK?
I'm wondering.
Let me step sideways for a moment and
and and then we'll return
to our discussion
about Venezuela and South America
in general.
You know,
I don't think it's really appropriate
now to conceptualize what's happening
around the world, but particularly
in the West in political terms,
precisely because it's something deeper
than what's merely political.
And one of the ideas
I've been toying with,
I'd like your opinion about it, is that
the default human
moral stance is probably left wing.
You know, Ben Shapiro said something to me
at one point, just off the cuff that
tangled its way into my thinking,
and I suppose,
is one of the motivations
for this idea that
he said he's a communist in his family.
And so, you know, if you
if you have a family,
if you have children,
you're really hoping for something like
at least a part of you is hoping,
especially when they're kids,
for something like equality of outcome.
You want everyone to do well,
you're willing to intervene
on the side of the person who's,
you know, bearing
what, who's not quite as successful
at any given moment.
You want to distribute resources
as equitably as possible.
You your interaction with your children
and your wife is based
on essentially an ethos of care.
But, you know,
if you look at organizations
that move beyond the scope of the family
in size,
that ethos of care and equitable
care, let's say, doesn't scale well.
And modern civilizations are not families.
And here's here's some proof of that
from the psychological perspective.
So the personality trait agreeableness
is associated with maternal care.
Let's say it's it's the dimension
of empathic, self-sacrificial care.
And women are substantially higher
in trait agreeableness
across the world than men.
What predicts success
in a complex society on the personality
side isn't agreeableness.
In fact, managers
who are more agreeable do worse
because people take advantage of them.
What predicts
success on the personality side
in a large scale
society is conscientiousness,
and conscientiousness is due to fullness
and industriousness and orderliness.
And it's it's the ethos of hard work.
It's a meritocratic ethos,
and it's called virtue.
Like to be conscientious isn't the same as
to be emotionally caring.
And so I wonder if
part of the reason that the
politics of the left, so to speak,
constantly mutate
and transform their immune to
criticism, say
by reference to history,
you can't just say, well, every communist
regime in the 20th century was a brutal,
bloody, dictatorial disaster.
It it doesn't hold water.
Maybe it doesn't hold water
because it's actually extremely difficult
to socialize people so that they can take
their place in a complex society
without defaulting to the underlying
ethos of familial care, you know?
And so if you're a harsh
and discriminating person,
if you're very meritocratic oriented,
if you say to someone,
I don't give a damn about your feelings,
it matters what sort of job you do.
You know, you're you're a harsh voice,
and you might be a necessary voice
to keep civilization itself running,
but that doesn't mean
that you're necessarily
an attractive voice, especially to people
who think instinctively
in terms of an ethos of care.
And it's very,
very easy to appeal to that.
And so I think part of the problem
and then you might add to that,
another problem.
So imagine that
if you're driven by
necessity, when times are hard,
it becomes obvious that those
who can should be allowed to do
or should be pushed forward.
To do that,
the meritocratic have to rise to the top
because otherwise disaster looms.
If you've been in a situation
where economic security has been granted
to you in some ways
effortlessly for several generations,
even it it's also perhaps much easier
to default to that ethos of care
and to attend to the outliers in society
who haven't served themselves well,
but also perhaps haven't been served
well by the conscientious ethos.
And so I'm wondering
about your thoughts of that,
you know, like
because we usually think about this.
Well, some people have left wing beliefs
and some people have right wing beliefs,
and that's the battlefield.
It's like,
I don't think that's a good
level of analysis, because I don't exactly
think this is about ideas.
I think the default human position
might be equality of outcome
in small groups,
and that you have to struggle against that
mightily with your education system,
maybe your moral system as a whole,
to impose a meritocratic
like a cold virtue meritocracy
on top of that.
And what obviously, we haven't been doing
a very good job of that.
So I'm curious, you're well-versed
in the Austrian school of economics.
I'm I'm wondering what you think
of that kind of theorizing.
And this is really interesting,
because Friedrich Hayek
wrote a paper
called The Mirage of Social Justice,
where he argued
exactly what you are saying.
He said that this idea of social justice,
that justice that we had to,
you know, redistribute wealth
so everyone gets an equal share
or in terms that, guarantee
the survival of the, community.
it's an idea that he attributes
to our past for thousands of years,
we were a small communities,
tribes, basically, we have this family
ethos, the care ethos,
and it was the way to survive.
But we were communities
only of a couple of, dozen
people, or maybe over 100,
but not more than that.
You knew everyone.
and and this is the instincts.
He says we evolved, in this,
type of environment.
And and so socialism, in the end,
wants to apply,
this moral instincts
to the what he called the complex
society, the larger society, you know,
which is civilization, basically.
And that's why,
you have this regression towards tribalism
and you have it with, with socialism
and communism and with nationalism,
when nationalism is exacerbated,
like the Nazis did in Germany, then you
you go back to the tribe
and you feel protected by the tribe, and,
and you have this unifying,
referee against this identity.
And you are,
you know, like you are, again,
like this organism
and you are part of a whole.
You are not just an individual
looking for yourself.
And this is the care ethics
ethos that you were, talking about
is really interesting
also because Gerald Coyne,
who was a very famous Marxist,
a professor at Oxford University, he said,
he wrote a book, why not socialism?
and by socialism he didn't mean Nordic
type of welfare state
or something like that.
He meant like really?
So equality of outcomes more or less.
and he was saying and he said that the,
instinctive socialist
ideology of the socialist philosophy
appealed to an end, an instinct
that was so ingrained in human nature.
And it was going to come back over
and over and over Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
okay.
Let me add two data points to that.
Okay. Or three.
So we did a study in 2016
looking at personality
and cognitive predictors
of politically correct authoritarianism.
So that wouldn't be democratic socialism.
That would be the far left
authoritarian types.
And the things that predicted it were low
verbal intelligence,
which was a walloping predictor.
So you could imagine
it's a very simple narrative, right?
There are victims
and there are victimizers.
That explains everything.
And if you're moral,
you're on the side of the victims.
And that's that's something
like a predatory infant instinct.
Right?
There are predators there are infants.
You're obviously on the side of the
infants, and to hell with the predators.
So so you can think of that
as an instinctual orientation
and an effective
one under certain conditions. Okay.
What else predicted?
feminine temperament,
high agreeableness in particular.
And then.
And then there's another
the other data point I would say
is that if you look in the United States
right now, the the people who are holding
the radical utopians in power
are women between 18 and 34.
Okay.
And now they're particularly targeted
by the Iranians and the Chinese
on TikTok. Right.
And they're bombarded with images, for
example, of dying Palestinian children.
And that's a targeted attack.
We know that.
We know that the Iranians
are behind that in the Chinese,
and it's extremely effective.
And women between the ages of 18
and 34 are wildly discordant
in their political views
in relationship to everyone else.
Now, 50% of them are also childless.
Right.
So so there's an element
of the maternal instinct run amok
on the political landscape,
because you could easily say,
and I don't think
that it's an exaggeration
and our empirical data
is supported that is that,
that maternal
instinct is going to find its target.
It's, it's going to find its expression.
And if it doesn't find its expression
within the confines of a family
where there's some real demand
to take care of the,
of those who are unable
to take care of themselves, children,
essentially infants primarily, then it's
going to find its expression politically.
And that can be exploited,
as it certainly is, by the Chinese
and the Iranians on TikTok.
And so.
The battle
that we're engaged in politically,
I believe, is better construed
and in the manner that we just described.
It's a it's a battle between
an instinctive orientation towards care
and a higher order
cognitive interpretation
that's associated with conscientiousness
that notes how complex system of systems
operate and introduces a different
standard, which would essentially be
something like the the cold hearted,
meritocratic standard.
Okay. So you see that.
You see a parallel between that and what
the Austrian school economists proposed.
Okay. That's that's
what I, that's what I thought.
So okay. Okay.
Okay.
So that's that I'm going to bang
that around in the back of my head.
Maybe we could turn.
We don't have a lot of time for this
because we're running out of time
on the YouTube side.
But maybe we could turn our attention to
developments
that are arguably somewhat positive.
Chile is somewhat positive.
What do you think about what's happening
in Argentina with Malaya?
And we also have the example
of El Salvador under and with its turning
to both Bitcoin, interestingly enough,
and to the US dollar.
So I'm
what let's start with Argentina.
So what are your views on
what is what is happening in Argentina
like is what Malaya is doing is that
is that being is that producing
any success on economic grounds?
Because it's very difficult
to sort out the wheat from the chaff
in terms of anything
approximating legacy media
coverage of Argentina.
here that I'm a good friend of Millay,
and we have been working
for, cost of freedom in Latin America
for ten years.
together.
So what is happening in Argentina
is the most fascinating
and interesting thing
that I've seen, of course, in my lifetime,
but also, I think in the last,
half a century, because
what, what is really taking
place is a cultural revolution.
And in a positive sense,
not the not the Chinese type of Ma
Maoist type of cultural revolution,
but Argentina was the wealthiest country
in the world in 18 96, with the highest
per capita income in the world.
We had a constitution in place.
The 1853 constitution that was designed
by Juan Bautista Alberti,
who was an admirer of the founding Fathers
of the United States.
He was a classical liberal, conservative,
classical liberal.
He believed that the government
had to be limited, and he
he saw in the French revolutionary
tradition of people like John Jackson
saw one of the main reasons why
Latin America was not prosperous enough,
and because we expect expected everything
from omnipotent government.
He actually has an article called
openly Put in government and he said
the Americans, on the other hand,
they they expect from government nothing.
They fix these things for themselves.
Okay.
So he created the 1853 Constitution,
and after that, Argentina became
the most successful country in the world
in terms of per capita.
in combat, if you went to 1914,
you had half of the population in Buenos
Aires was born,
not in Buenos Aires, where
there were foreigners coming from Europe.
So it was a legitimate question
to ask yourself,
are we emigrating to the United States
or to Argentina in the late 19th century?
This is what happened back then.
And this is why also the Argentinian
population looks so European in general.
And you had in the last World Cup
all these nonsensical articles saying,
well, why there are no black people
in the soccer team in Argentina and so on.
This is and, and,
and this is very European population,
but in the 20s and 30s and then
especially 40s with Juan Domingo Peron,
who was a fascist general, collectivist,
fascist general, admirer of Mussolini.
He had met Mussolini, actually, in Italy,
but he was anti-communist
at the same time.
He didn't want the central economy for
you know, the whole thing, but
he wanted the corporatist type
of very corrupt economy.
And then they they changed
dramatically the institutions.
And Argentina became, a declining nation
and a poor nation
compared to, the rest of the world,
at least the developed world.
And and what did Millais do?
Millais managed Millais
and the free market movement,
the classical liberal movement.
Conservative movement in Argentina.
I played a role also there.
so we managed to transform dramatically
the mindset, especially of young people.
In Argentina,
you are allowed to vote with 16.
So between 16 and 24, Millais
got 70% of the votes, 70%.
And this these young people,
forced the change towards, Millais
type of very, hardcore
radical, free market, regime,
but not because people were upset,
because inflation was so high and so on.
No, that was not the reason.
There is a structural change in Argentina.
All of these people, they would have
they would have been Peronist 20 years ago
or 30 years ago. Now they already retire.
And how did we achieve that?
Well,
a lot of going to media, giving interviews
and especially social media, TikTok,
Instagram and YouTube
were crucial to change the mentality
of millions of people.
And of course, the style Millais has,
charisma, a style that is very,
you know, eccentric,
let's put it that way.
And he is irreverent.
He's he has the rhetoric of
a revolutionary, which is very Argentinian
by the, by the way,
is not really strange in that country.
he's very theatrical,
but he's also intellectually very solid.
So he came to power, and he's doing
exactly what he said he was going to do.
He didn't lie.
He said, you know, all all over the
I mean, the last years
that he has been on television
over the last 5 or 6 years, he has been
saying what was going to happen
and, what it takes to fix it.
Everything came as he predicted,
and now he's in government.
He has brought down inflation
from over 25% a month to less than 4%.
you know,
you know, the inflation
in terms of, goods,
food, it's it's 0%.
So 0% food inflation.
Then you have, fiscal fiscal surplus
since since January,
since he came to power,
you have a fiscal surplus every month
now, consecutive, way.
And then, you are starting to see,
a little bit of a reactivation
of the economy, because you, you first
had to deal with inflation.
They were on the verge of hyperinflation.
If Melaye had not come to power,
you would have inflation at over
15,000% in Argentina right now,
15,000% would be the complete catastrophe.
and he has been a very skillful politician
because he doesn't have
a majority in Congress.
But even so, Congress has passed after
several negotiations
and failed attempts to pass.
But the Basic Law,
which is a, law that dramatically changes
the structure of Argentinian economy,
which is really a rent seeking society.
It's really,
you know, a corporate interests, in bed
with politicians and exploiting
everyone else for their own Okay. So.
So let's do let's do this.
Let's do this.
Let's.
We've got another half an hour
or two to to talk on the daily Wire side
I think why don't we delve more deeply
into what's happening in Argentina.
And also to give some consideration
to that
as a model
for what could occur in South America
more generally if the leftist utopian tide
could be stemmed.
So does that seem reasonable to you?
Alright, let's do that.
So for everybody, good, good.
So for everybody in watching
and listening, most of you know that I do
an additional half an hour with my guests
on, on the Daily Wear platform.
And so that's what we're going to do.
And if you found this discussion
useful and interesting,
you could give some consideration
to joining us there.
I can tell further into the sorts
of things that we've been talking about.
And so,
and so I think that's what we'll turn to.
And I would say, thank you to the Daily
Wire for making this discussion possible.
And, and,
doctor Kaiser, thank you very much to you
for agreeing to talk to us today.
obviously, we could talk
for a much longer period of time,
and perhaps we'll do that again
in the not too distant future.
There's lots of things
to discuss in more detail
with regard to Venezuela, let's say.
But for now, we'll
we'll turn our attention to,
to Argentina and maybe
with a foray into El Salvador.
And we'll do that on the daily website
so you can all join us there.
Thank you very much, sir,
for agreeing to talk to me today.
I know we only scratched the surface,
but at least it's a start.
much for having me.
You mean.